feat: article exploring ways to compute MoE (#3038)
huggingface/blog: three-moes.md

Reviewer: in general let's avoid single letter variable names and find meaningful ones!

---
title: "Three MoEs"
# thumbnail: /blog/assets/three-moes/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: drbh
date: 2025-08-25
---

# Three MoEs

Three Ways to Compute Mixture of Experts (MoE) in PyTorch

Mixture of Experts (MoE) looks complex, but under the hood it’s just:

1. Route tokens to experts.
2. Apply MLPs (one per expert).
3. Recombine outputs with routing weights.

> Below are **three ways** to compute MoE in PyTorch — from simple to complex.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below are **three ways** to build MoEs in PyTorch — from simple to complex.
```

```

✅ This confirms that each token picks 2 experts and assigns them weights that sum to 1.

---

## Method 1: Dense / Repeat Experts

The "naïve" way: **send every token to every expert**, then weight results at the end.

```python
def repeat_experts(hidden_states, routing_weights,
                   gate_up_proj, gate_up_proj_bias,
                   down_proj, down_proj_bias):
    B, S, H = hidden_states.shape
    E = routing_weights.shape[1]
    I = gate_up_proj.shape[-1] // 2  # intermediate size

    # flatten and repeat tokens for each expert
    hs = hidden_states.reshape(-1, H).repeat(E, 1).view(E, -1, H)  # [E, BS, H]

    # expert feedforward
    gate_up = torch.bmm(hs, gate_up_proj) + gate_up_proj_bias[..., None, :]  # [E, BS, 2I]
    gate, up = gate_up[..., ::2], gate_up[..., 1::2]
    glu = gate * torch.sigmoid(gate * 1.72)
    act = (up + 1) * glu

    downed = torch.bmm(act, down_proj) + down_proj_bias[..., None, :]        # [E, BS, H]

    # apply routing weights
    flat_rw = routing_weights.view(-1, E).t().unsqueeze(-1)  # [E, BS, 1]
    downed = downed * flat_rw
    out = downed.sum(0).view(B, S, H)
    return out

```

Quick test:

```python

> hs = torch.randn(B, S, H)

Reviewer 2: very nice to have simple reproducible snippets, would be nice to put these into a notebook and link at the end so people don't have to copy paste to try
